Do they hope to rebuild that building?
There's some controversy right now because there are some people who argue that it should be left a ruin like Coventry Cathedral as a memorial to the victims of the siege and others who say, no, you should rebuild it.
Then there's the problem of if it's rebuilt,
whether it is to resume its function as a library, for which it was not particularly well-suited in modern age, in terms of wiring and so forth, or to have it be some sort of cultural center.
I don't know if you, sort of like the Boston Public Library, where you'd have a modern functional library, and then the older building used either as a research library or as a cultural function center.
There's pictures of that, too.
Well, I have to start with.
You're going to remember to give me this gentleman's email address, right?
Buck Ashutcher?
Sure.
I think I'll just compose a letter to him and let him know what I'm doing and rub this stuff, go back, transcribe the tape.
No, it's after.
The exterior is still a shell.
It's still there.
But...
Although we originally started this whole business as a project for manuscripts, we kept getting information on various people doing very small things to help.
And so we decided as long as we had a web page to try to coordinate that.
And so we have a whole list of projects to which we're about to add a brand new one, which I'll also give you a printout of.
James Carroll, who has a column in the Boston Globe.
wrote a couple of really good articles on the National Library.
One of his devoted followers has a small family foundation, you know, African Hill types, and was moved to make a $20,000 donation to the Sabre Foundation here in Cambridge, which has now started a book donation program from Bosnia.
And we've got the president of Harvard University, Neil Rudenstein, involved, and he directed the Harvard University Press and the Harvard University Library to donate books through Sabre.
And Sabre means what?
Sabre is the name of the foundation.
I have no idea whether it was originally an acronym or it means something.
What else?
And similarly, we have... S-A-B-R-E, right?
Mm-hmm.
All caps.
Is it all caps?
No, I think it's normal, you know.
Big S, small A, B, R, A. Actually, his email address is right here.
Oh, good.
Oh, there it is.
Excellent.
Are you printing that for me?
Yeah, I'm just printing that for you.
How do you pronounce his name?
Vakar Shich.
There should be a little mark on the S and the C. Okay.
Flash.
Stuff by regular mail still is problematic.
Sometimes it gets through.
What's wrong with e-mail?
It's instantaneous, isn't it?
E-mail's good.
He wrote this, which I thought was very moving.
This is great.
This is wonderful.
This back up there.
Okay.
Let's make it.
Yeah, that's the end of one section there.
The main problem with printing anything off the web is the pages are never numbered, so you have to be careful about the end of eight months.
But it wasn't just these two libraries.
I mean, in Sarajevo, seven or eight of the branches of the public library were destroyed, targeted and destroyed.
And most are the public library, the university library.
the library of the Archbishop of Mostar, the archives of the State Commission on Conservation of Monuments, all of these, many small towns.
The local archives were the first ones they went after when they blew up mosques or Catholic churches.
They always blew up the community buildings or parish house that had the local records.
I mean, the idea really is to remove not only the people, but any trace that they ever were there.
If your ideology says that people can never live together, then the evidence that they've actually managed to do so successfully over centuries is something you cannot let stand.
Now, you're from Hungary.
How long have you been here?
Since I was 13.
A long time.
Came here in 1961.
I'm working at it here.
I've got a lot to work with here, I think.
When do you think is the best time to go over there?
The winters are basically parallel our winters, right?
Yeah, and I think you'd probably want to go sooner rather than later.
I don't think
Politically, anything is likely to go wrong there before the U.S.
elections, because Clinton wouldn't let that happen.
If Bosnia blows up in late October, it would be dreadful for the presidential elections.
There are no guarantees for December.
So if you really intend to go, I can put you in touch with somebody who's just been there.
and who can give you a recommendation on places to stay and people to see.
And also the best way to get there.
I guess you said going through Amsterdam is probably the... Was it you that said or was it... No, I didn't say anything about Amsterdam.
Marion said that, I think.
Well, she was there just a few months ago.
This is something... This is like one section of their heritage that was lost, just the...
Islamic manuscripts, which means about 50,000 throughout the country.
Did this print out all of it?
No, it ran out of paper.
Not so much for the list itself, which gets sort of numbing as you keep reading, but there's an end note that I think... These are the things I'd like to have, however.
Yeah.
There's an end note to that... No, I actually rather like having all of this.
a rather dumb website by somebody who went to Sarajevo, took lots of snapshots of people and asked them to give representative quotes, most of which are not terribly interesting, but that's just the background he chose.
But the reason I picked this is because one of the people he happens to interview is
How in the world did he choose those monkeys at Scotland?
Yeah, I don't know.
Explain your own... I mean, obviously, you're from that region, certainly not from that country, but you're from your European... No, my own connection is... I mean, I never had a close personal connection to Bosnia as such.
First of all, I think because I've traveled in that area, this is the last part, which you might want to look at.
It's part of the experience.
We had a volunteer who actually keyed in this list of libraries that were destroyed.
Oh, right.
Okay.
Are you talking about your own interests?
Yeah.
What happened was... I'll read all of this when I get in.
First of all, as a librarian, I just found it outrageous that a major library of one and a half million books could burn down.
And nobody even took cognizance of the fact, let alone raised a voice in protest or tried to help.
I mean, I was just absolutely flabbergasted.
The first thing I did when I learned about it is I started writing letters to all the professional organizations I was a member of.
And nobody—the historians, the librarians, the archivists—nobody wanted to touch it with ten-foot poles.
Why?
Because of the politics?
Yeah, the American Library Association said, well, we don't do politics, as if burning books is a political thing.
You know, this really stupid American notion that every coin has two sides and every dispute can be safely split down the middle.
And, you know, I'm sure these very same people that had been alive in 1942 would have said, well, now for our next panel discussion, we'll give five minutes to Herr Göring and five minutes to the Jewish gentleman.
And I'm sure the truth is somewhere down the middle.
You know, that sort of thing.
So, gosh, we don't want to take sides.
Did they answer your letters, or did they ignore them?
I got back very cautiously worded responses, usually by telephone.
They don't want to do anything in writing.
And generally saying, no, we cannot introduce this on the agenda.
If we did, we couldn't point fingers, name names.
Tania Lorkovich, who was—I mean, I just quit the ALA over it.
Really?
Tania Lorkovich, who is a librarian at Yale, actually pushed for a resolution at ALA's 1993 mid-winter meeting.
There was a huge ruckus about it.
Various people who were annoyed at the ALA for various other past resolutions that they politically disagreed with, although they had no particular access to grind about Bosnia,
were absolutely outraged that the ALA should be spending its time on such things.
And so there was a huge floor fight.
This was the mid-winter meeting in Denver, out of which eventually, after much acrimony, came the most namby-pamby resolution deploring the loss of access to information of the peoples of the former Yugoslavia.
It's as if these libraries had all somehow destroyed themselves.
There was no mention of the agency that destroyed them.
There was also no action suggested.
But what really blows my mind about it is that in order to placate the people who had objected to the resolution in the first place, the ALA decided, contrary to their practice in the past with resolutions, to send the text of the resolution to three or four designated agencies
the White House, the International Federation of Library Association, UNESCO, but then not to publicize it, even in its own publications.
So having taken this brave resolution, it was mentioned in passing in the overall report on the Denver meeting in about half a sentence, and that was it.
If I wanted to talk to somebody at the ALA,
You can talk to Tania Lorkovich, who was at the meeting, but I can probably dig up for you the person who eventually leaked the text of the resolution to me, somebody at the L.A.
headquarters.
And so I actually have it, otherwise I'd have no way of knowing what it was even that they voted on.
IFLA, the International Federation of Library Association, met in Barcelona that summer.
An almost identical text was passed, only after any mention of the word Bosnia was deleted from it at the insistence of the Russian delegations, which said they would walk out.
And the ALA, with all of its political involvement domestically, and you know they are one of the more political organizations around,
and with all of its resources, you know, huge membership, has yet to take any action to aid Bosnian libraries in terms of helping to train librarians or organizing assistance.
I mean, that's what really bugs me, that it's left to people like me with no resources and full-time jobs and families to do this on the side.
Mm-hmm.
when you have what a Council of Europe report called a major cultural catastrophe.
Who else works with you?
I mean, who would you like to give credit to?
Well, there are people like Tania.
There's people like... How many spell her name?
T-A-N-I-A.
L-O-R-K-O-V-I-C.
And she's in Yale?
Yeah, she's the Slavic librarian at Yale.
There's the Slavic... She's at the Stirling.
Then there's Janet Crayne, C-R-A-Y-N-E, who is a Slavic specialist at the University of Michigan, who has worked very hard on this.
There's my colleague, Jeff Spurr, who is a cataloger here at the Fine Arts Library.
S-P-U-R-R.
He'll be coming back from vacation on the 19th.
You know a fellow out in Indiana by the name of Laszlo Kovacs?
Have you ever heard of him?
No, it sounds like a very common Hungarian name.
He's quite a bibliographer.
He contacted me after A Gentle Madness, and he's traveled extensively through European, not in conjunction with Sarajevo, but I thought you might know him.
He's written a lot of articles.
So anyway, then there's the nice systems people at Harvard who really sort of took the ball and ran with it and initiated that whole OCLC project.
So there are people throughout the world who have been trying to move things, but again, they've been small private individuals, people struggling to set up little private foundations.
There's the Sarajevo Fund in New York, which was largely from the proceeds of one book,
Why Bosnia Writings on the Balkan War.
Have you ever seen it?
I've heard of the book, yeah.
Yeah, anyway, part of the proceeds of the book went into the Sarajevo Fund, but that's raised less than $10,000 so far.
So realistically, when do you think that you'll see something?
Well, some things are happening.
One thing is the first shipment of books from Sabre will be leaving for Bosnia next month.
There is a gentleman called Merle Colglazier, M-E-R-L-E C-O-L-G-L-A-Z-I-E-R, who is a medical librarian somewhere in Virginia, I believe.
And he worked out something called Journal Share, where he's just sending a whole container load of medical journals to the University of Sarajevo.
In the case of Sabre, we've got a real ongoing program.
We've gotten a number of publishers involved.
So far, Harvard is involved in a big way.
MIT and BC are involved with them.
There is a wonderful gentleman in Montreal by the name of Andre McLaughlin, who, in spite of the McLaughlin, is actually French-Canadian, and who
was much seized by this whole thing.
He's a great friend of Bakarsic, by the way.
I thought that was he.
Yeah.
And he was, during the war, was actually smuggling in printing paper through the U.N.
lines.
The UMPRAFOR, the U.N.
Protection Force, during the middle of the siege, was operating Sarajevo Airport strictly for relief supplies.
And they had a list of forbidden items given to them by the Serbs, amongst which were books and printing paper.
And I know of at least one shipment of 5,000 medical books that was destroyed on the tarmac by UN troops because they had come in on a relief flight.
So that was punishment?
That was a no-no?
Yes.
Other things included personal letters.
If you had more than five personal letters that you were carrying for people, the UN people would search your luggage and confiscate and destroy excess letters.
Why don't they just let them go through?
Because they said they weren't there to take sides, and if they didn't follow the directions of the Serbs, that would imperil the shipments of relief supplies.
Wow.
So they were acting essentially as the capos, the camp guards for the Serbs.
Anyway, McLaughlin actually holds strings in Canada using local Canadian politics by persuading the Quebec provincial government to donate supplies of printing paper, of which Quebec has a superfluity.
And then because Canada is the way it is, any Canadian undertaking, including humanitarian relief, has to have a French-Canadian component.
You know, it's sort of like affirmative action.
And so he somehow talked Care Canada into making space on its shipments of relief supplies for the printing paper donated by Quebec.
And Care Canada, unlike Care U.S., has direct links with the Canadian government.
Then once the paper got unloaded on the Adriatic coast, he got Care Canada to supply trucks
which trucked the paper to the outer edge of Sarajevo Airport, where he waited for about two months until a ceasefire, which allowed him to drive the trucks across without anybody stopping him.
And the paper was used to print children's books.
So anyway, I'll also tell you how to get in touch with him.
This is the quote from Bakasic, which is funny.
To be...
Why don't you read it?
To be quite frank and sincere, this is how I feel today.
I am a small church, not a great cathedral.
This is reflecting on the frustration of having to gratefully receive several tons of useless and obsolete textbooks, a gift of some thoughtless but well-meaning individual who had not considered that the cost of transporting this paper to Sarajevo could have rebuilt a school.
Just give me the money, please.
I mean, this is the other tragedy.
You tell people about this, their first reaction is, my God, we have all these books left over from our last duplicate sale.
Sure, yeah, but you read his digest, condensed books.
Exactly.
Totally useless.
That's why they're left over in being sent.
Yes.
You know, the 1967 membership list of the American Association of Electrical Engineers.
Thanks a lot.
Yeah.
That's funny.
So this is why I'm so glad that we got Sabre...
involved because they will not ship any book over until they've had an okay from the other end. So they actually? The computer does help. Yeah. So they email or fax whole lists which they're then are checked off at the other end. I mean I expect to I don't know the context exactly where this fits into my book. Yeah. It will get in. Yeah. You know because I am certainly interested in the future.
Yeah.
And this is the future, too.
I mean, the future is always this kind of stuff, isn't it?
Yeah.
But, you know, again, what he's looking for are books.
Realistically, you're not going to have 800 village schools in Bosnia suddenly reading all their texts online.
That's right.
But this is a guy who knows about books.
So he's giving up the ministry post and turning down a lucrative offer from World Bank to...
direct the distribution of the books that Saber strips over.
This is the same fellow that you're corresponding with, and this is the fellow who describes the burning.
He also is the fellow that burned the books for heat, right?
Right.
So, pretty amazing stuff.
Now, let me get you a couple of other things I promised you.
I don't want to take up too much.
I got a 2 o'clock appointment in Boston.
Okay, well, that clock is about 10 minutes fast.
It's bar time.
What time did you call?
Bar time, you know.
That's right.
Last call.
No, I used to work as a bartender back in college.
Where did you go to school?
University of Chicago.
Uh-huh.
And so my last year I was old enough to do it, and they always used to set the clock fast so people who had one last drink would still make it out in time.
When you moved to the United States, did you live in Chicago?
Yeah, I lived in Chicago.
I essentially went to high school and college in Chicago.
I went to graduate school at Princeton in New Jersey.
And your degrees are in...?
My undergraduate degree is in history, and actually had something to do with Bosnia.
My graduate degrees are in New Year's studies at Princeton, and I have a library degree from Simmons.
Which is a great place in a library.
Yeah, the virtual monopoly in New England.
And your duties here at Harvard...?
I'm a bibliographer for Islamic art and architecture.
Harvard has a chair in Islamic art history.
And this is part of the support structure.
When they establish the chair, they set up a small endowment to run a department in the library.
And how large is the library?
Oh, well, the books and photos, et cetera, that we buy all get integrated into the Harvard libraries, which is huge.
But I mean, I thought you meant to collect them.
No, no.
So it's all integrated in the larger Harvard libraries.
Right.
So we buy books.
by photographs and slides.
We catalog them.
We provide reference services.
We're at Widener?
Mostly here.
Some at Widener, a few at the architecture library.
And we do this kind of thing, which is essentially bibliographic outreach.
What we do is indexes that are published all over the world.
On specific subjects, we do the subject cataloging for, subject indexing for Islamic art and architecture.
This one.
Basically, we see to it that people know about books.
And again, in the modern electronic world, what this results in is people who live in places that don't have these journals write to us with requests for Xeroxes of articles.
But if the indexes didn't have the citations, they wouldn't know these things existed.
Let me get you two things.
Oh, yeah, this is what I just got today.
It says, hi, Andras, in case you haven't seen this email message, I'm forwarding you a copy.
JournalShare will be sending a 20-foot container of medical journals to the University of Sarajevo in early September.
This will be our first shipment, and hopefully there will be many future shipments.
I'll keep you informed.
I'll print this out for you.
That's today?
Yeah, they just came in today.
And let's see.
And this was just yesterday.
This is the press release on... Oh, the Harvard thing, yeah.
I'd love to see that.
Get a copy of that.
Anyway, this, again, is hot off the press.
We just got the okay yesterday from the Harvard president's office.
Got a call to run everything by them before you send it out.
I'm an old public affairs officer in the Navy, and I... Protocol is... Anyway, if you want to reach Cole Glaser, he's got an email.
I'll also get you Lorcovich's email.
Oh, if she's not very good at answering here, you may have to call her up.
I'll call her.
And perhaps, and then I guess if I could get that New York Times article from yesterday.
That's upstairs, yeah.
But one day I couldn't get a Times yesterday.
You know, they won't deliver my address in Grafton.
What's wrong with it?
Well, I have to go buy it.
I mean, the stores get two copies, three copies, and all of my outlets were out yesterday.
Oh.
Well, that happens.
I read the New York Times on the computer.
I just go... Okay, and we can Xerox a couple of those other things for you.
Now, let's see if I have Tania's thing here.
I'm going to shut off it.
Tania Lorko
L-O-R-K-O-V-I-C.
I saw it, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's Connecticut.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
V-T-J-A-N.
The J's and...
that part of europe are always pronounced as y's. So who would have thought of her as we get to this point in the at the end of the century that you'd be talking about rebuilding a recently destroyed library? All righty I think this is good for a good. We're looking at uh to say it once more. It's a uh Sarajevo Urbicide meaning city and killing of cities and it was an exhibition
published by the Association of Architects of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and then it was reprinted for showing at the Centre of Pompidou in Paris.
And you're showing me a photograph of the burnt books of the Oriental Institute in Sarajevo.
Copies of these photographs should be available to me, you'd think, huh?
I can provide them.
We don't need them right now, by the way.
This is like the Museum of the City of Sarajevo with direct shell impacts.
So it's really pretty ghastly.
Mosque.
Now, here you can see how the targeting analysis works.
This is the 16th-century mosque of Ghazi Husrev Beg.
You can see that is not a random pattern of shelling.
No, no.
Can I get a xerox of that, please?
Sure.
That would be really great.